In 2003 the Human Genome Project completed a monumental scientific achievement:
the first complete map of the human genome.
A few decades later you can now do a genetic test ...
by spitting into a tube and paying a few hundred dollars.
But I'm not here for that.
This is CUBRIC, one of the most advanced brain sciences in Europe,
and they do not scan the human genome here, they scan connectomes.
The term "connectome" was invented a few years ago ...
as a name for the simultaneous mapping of all brain connections at the same time.
These connections are formed by what is called the "white matter" in the brain.
We know that the brain has gray matter.
However, it also has white matter, and that is the wiring between them.
We are also very interested in the so-called microstructures,
differentiating based on the size and shape of cells ...
which may only be one thousandth of a millimeter in size.
This scanner will enable us ...
to get information about differences within the entire brain ...
in a way that was only posthumously possible in the past.
I would have preferred to have myself scanned, but unfortunately ...
I have a little too much metal in my body.
Do not worry about me or the camera being sucked in here,
this is just the simulator they train on.
There are no magnets at all here.
The real scanner is there.
The magnetic field of this MRI scanner allows us ...
to observe the movement of water molecules ...
over a distance of about a thousandth of a millimeter.
To map someone's complete connectome,
we must first acquire the raw data,
then we have to adapt it to calculation models,
and then we have to reconstruct these trajectories.
This way we quickly go from a few hundred megabytes ...
up to dozens of gigabytes.
Hopeful science fiction fans should not be too enthusiastic:
just as you can not make a copy of a person by copying their genome ...
but only an identical twin baby who does not know anything,
scanning a connectome does not mean that you can suddenly upload someone into a computer.
Scanners like this generate road maps, no satellite photos.
An impressive road map, though.
We are far from capable of identifying differences in personality at this time,
but that does not mean that we can not do this in the future.
People are generally wired in the same way,
but the subtle differences in the forms of the routes ...
seem to be very reproducible.
When we scan 300 people, and then scan one of them again,
we can easily identify them from those 300 people.
In fact, any neurological or psychiatric illness you can think of ...
a symptom of poor brain function.
And we know that brain function is based on information transfer from region to region.
We can say things like "there is something else in the integrity of the white matter".
For all kinds of neurological or psychiatric diseases, the information from this scanner ...
be very valuable and give us important new insights.
And if we can bring down the cost of the technology,
can you have a connectoom scan made ...
and receive customized treatment for your specific connectomic abnormality.
At this moment, connectome scans are cumbersome and expensive,
and a lot of time is needed to process and visualize them.
But only 20 years ago that applied to genome scans.
Within twenty years, connectome research could mean just as much for the world.
Many thanks to everyone at CUBRIC, at the University of Cardiff.
If you want to know more, they have a YouTube channel that you can explore,
and there is a link in the description.